STRESS AND HEALTH
Stanislav V. Kasl
Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510
INTRODUCTION
A good travelogue provides a vicarious experience of a new place or country for the chair-bound listener. A travel agent, in contrast, provides the would-be traveler with materials and information that facilitate travel itself. The research literature on stress and health has become such a vast and complex terrain that a 20 page account of this territory can no longer be written without great danger of oversimplification, biased selectivity, and idiosyncratic conclusions. Consequently, in this chapter I assume the role of a travel agent and provide the reader with material that should facilitate informed transit through this scientific domain, but that cannot be an adequate substitute for it. This material consists of two parts: (a) discussion of salient methodological and, to a lesser extent, conceptual issues regarding stress and disease studies, so that the reader may have a proper appreciation of the strengths and limitations of specific types of studies and their findings; (b) references to major compilations and reviews of the stress and disease literature and to selected illustrative studies in order to characterize the scope of the work being done, the types of findings obtained, and the ways in which redirection of research efforts may enhance payoff in the future. The self-same body of research evidence on stress and disease is susceptible to widely varying summaries and conclusions. By emphasizing studies that show stress can cause adverse health status changes, one would paint a picture of broad and consistent effects. This would neglect negative evidence and methodological flaws, and would create a picture of exaggerated human vulnerability with little resilience or adaptability. On the other hand, an emphasis on methodological weaknesses and negative findings would suggest the conclusion that no trustworthy evidence exists and that, perhaps, the purely biomedical approach to disease etiology is adequate after all. It is wrong to approach the stress and disease studies as if we were examining the evidence for or against a very specific research hypothesis (such as, does an increase in regular physical activity among middle-aged men reduce total serum cholesterol?). No such simple tallying of evidence is possible. Rather we are dealing with a broad and varied area of research topics and methodologies for which, at present, no satisfactory or commonly accepted conceptual theoretical framework exists. Without such a framework, no compelling way of organizing and reviewing the evidence exists; at best, we may be able to establish low-level inductive generalizations on the basis of this review. 
THE CONCEPT OF STRESS AND THE SCOPE OF THIS REVIEW
The term "stress" continues to be used in several fundamentally different ways: (a) as an environmental condition; (b) as the appraisal of an environmental situation; ( c) as a response to the environmental condition or to its appraisal; (d) as an interactive term indicating the relationship between environmental demands and the person's capacity to meet these demands. In addition to the different ways the term "stress" is used by the different investigators, there is also lack of consensus, clarity, and precision with respect to each of the specific usages. Thus, for example, stress as an environmental condition (here the term "stressor" is often used) has no unique defining characteristics that have been agreed upon and that are adequately operationalized for health studies. Similarly, within the category of stress as a response to an environmental condition, the field offers no consensus on the unique set of responses (biological or psychosocial-behavioral) that would be criteria for this definition. A generic problem underlying much of this confusion and inconsistency is that we are trying to improve on a concept that in the vernacular usage has both stimulus and response connotations. In scientific research, however, we need to avoid circularity and to define stress cleanly either as a stimulus condition (so that we can study its consequences) or as a response (so that we can study its antecedents). But such "cleaner" conceptualizations leave us dissatisfied because we feel that something important has been left out: on the stimulus side, in the process itself, or on the response side. Hence, the vacillation, lack of clarity, absence of consensus. Writers on stress in the 1960s and early 1970s (e.g. 3, 117, 120, 126, 167) generally felt compelled to attempt to achieve (or impose) conceptual clarity, precision, uniformity. However, no one seems to have succeeded-at least to anyone else's satisfaction or acquiescence. The more recent writings (e.g. 43, 56,66, 101, 109, 144, 190) reveal a full acknowledgment of existing conceptual and terminological confusion, but also betray an unwillingness to continue an apparently hopeless struggle to transform "stress" into a precise scientific concept, embedded in a formal theory with linkages to other constructs. Furthermore, in these writings there is a parallel recognition that it is more productive to work on strengthening research design methodology (e.g. strong inferences regarding casual pathways, identification of underlying mechanisms and mediating processes, use of interpretable measures of health impact) and that conceptual issues can be, to some extent, sidestepped. In the present review, I try to sidestep these conceptual issues as much as is possible. Essentially, four classes of variables are examined as possible risk factors for disease incidence or adverse health status changes: 1. selected environmental conditions and experiences; 2. variables thought to be reactions to such environmental conditions; 3. indicators of distress or tension, whether or not they are linked up to any particular environmental condition; and 4. stable personal traits or characteristics that may link up with chronic or repeated exposures or with reactions of distress and tension. Collectively, these four classes of variables encompass the different uses of the term "stress." Such a delineation of the scope of the research domain to be reviewed is also compatible with approaches taken by other reviewers (e.g. 22, 43, 72,129,170). The term "stress" remains in the background and is invoked chiefly to decide on the relevance of particular studies investigating environmental conditions or reactions to them. The working definition of stress utilized in this review is that of "demands that tax the adaptive resources." This definition, proposed in an editorial to the first issue of the Journal of Human Stress (39), is an abbreviated version of McGrath's (126) fuller definition of stress as "a (perceived) substantial imbalance between demand and response capability, under conditions where failure to meet demand has important (perceived) consequences" (p. 20). It should be realized that such a definition is only partially satisfactory since the burden of defining one primary term is merely shifted onto several undefined secondary terms. Furthermore, measurement problems are increased as conceptual definitions become richer and more subtle. 
A NOTE ON "GOOD" STRESS
Additional confusion has been unnecessarily introduced into the already considerable conceptual muddle by trying to formulate a bipolar concept of stress, so that some stress may be seen as "good," with corresponding health status benefits. Such efforts are primarily due to Selye (e.g. 156) and his writings on "eustress" and "under stress." A few examples show that attempts to identify "good" stress either are based on somewhat idiosyncratic formulations of stress, or they represent misplaced attempts to reformulate some aspect of the theory regarding antecedents of stress. For example, if one equates the dimension of stress with level of environmental stimulation or with the organism's level of arousal or activation, then it is fully appropriate to postulate a curvilinear association, such that there is an optimal level of stimulation or activation, and too little as well as too much may have adverse consequences (e.g. 118). Similarly, if in the work setting one equates stress with level of work demands, then again it is reasonable to postulate an optimal or a curvilinear association. For example, Locke (122) has summarized a large job satisfaction research literature by concluding that desirable conditions at work include an optimal level of mental challenge with which the worker can cope successfully, and which then leads to involvement and personal interests. It can be seen that in both examples, stress no longer retained its common usage as a relational construct between demands and capabilities ("demands that tax adaptive resources"). Instead, it was made equivalent to a single dimension (level of stimulation, demands), which was not coordinated to the organism's needs and capacities. Dissatisfaction with certain formulations of antecedents of stress has also led to attempts to see the "good" side of stress. Thus the whole research literature on stressful life events is based not only on a very limited assessment instrument, the Schedule of Recent Experience or some modification of it (74), but also on an oversimplified formulation that the kinds of life experiences enumerated in the instrument necessarily tax the adaptive resources of the individual (i.e. are stressors). However, this equation (life event = stress; no life events = no stress) seems patently inadequate. From the life cycle perspective, certain events or changes are "normative": expected, planned, and desired (59, 138), and when such normal transitions do not take place (or happen "too early" or "too late"), the adaptive demands of their absence (rather than their presence) may constitute the stress. From a "person-environment fit" perspective (15, 51, 181), the chronic presence of a misfit between personal and environmental characteristics (e.g. skills vs demands, needs vs resources) would seem to be more taxing than a life event change, such as promotion, which serves to reduce the misfit. Once again, change may be less of a stressor than no change. However, none of these comments imply that a certain amount of "stress" is good for a person and is better than no stress; rather, they only imply that the automatic equation between life events and stress is inappropriate. It might also be speculated that the search for "good" stress represents an attempt to short-circuit (via some built-in circularity into our concepts) the need to study and to understand under what circumstances specific events or environmental conditions do and do not lead to adverse health outcomes and what makes individuals more or less susceptible to such outcomes. In this discussion, I have argued on theoretical grounds against the bipolar conceptualization of stress, with its attendant implication that some levels (or types) of stress are associated with health benefits. Ultimately, however, such issues need to be argued out on an empirical basis and with more specific and precise concepts. In the work setting, for example, we are really asking about the adverse health consequences of overload (excessive job demands) vs. underload (inadequate job demands and underutilization of skills, such as found on routine and monotonous jobs with little or no challenge). The research evidence (e.g. 94, 106) would seem to suggest that underload is associated with adverse psychological outcomes-certainly job dissatisfaction, but perhaps also low self-esteem and higher depression-but probably not with physical health effects, such as those related to cardiovascular disease. Overload, on the other hand, may represent an increase in cardiovascular risk (e.g. 84); however, it may be only quantitative overload (too many demands, excessive hours) that is involved and not qualitative overload (insufficient skills and resources). The psychological effect of a monotonous job may be a direct one (i.e. of the work itself) or, equally likely, an indirect one due to the low public esteem that accrues to boring, monotonous jobs (113). Boring and monotonous activities on the job are not, by themselves, associated with increased neuroendocrine activity, one indicator of stress (174), and there is some evidence that routine and structured jobs may acquire their own sources of satisfaction, particularly among workers alienated from the work ethic (157). Thus it would appear that adapting to monotonous jobs is possible without adverse health consequences. However, this is not true of jobs in which the work pace is controlled by machine, the environment is highly constraining, and the work, though repetitive, involves skilled judgments made at short intervals and thus demands constant attention (49, 85). 
AN OVERVIEW OF METHODOLOGICAL CONCERNS
"Inferring cause from passive observation" is a chapter title in the excellent text by Cook & Campbell (25) on quasi-experimentation. It is also the central issue in evaluating the stress and disease literature, in which the vast majority of studies on humans in real-life field settings understandably do not include experimental control over confounding variables and thus preclude clearcut causal interpretations. The major methodological concerns are listed below in a skeletal fashion and grouped by the four classes of variables listed as risk factors in the earlier section, Scope of Review. It is assumed that the reader is conversant with general epidemiological methods and textbook discussions of prospective, cross-sectional, and case-control study designs. 
Stress as Environmental Exposure or Life Change Experience
The strongest design here is a prospective study in which the cohort is picked up prior to exposure, the environmental condition is objectively defined and measured, and potential confounding variables (primarily biological risk factors, initial health status, and psychosocial self-selection variables-all of which might relate both to exposure and to disease outcome) are either absent or can be identified ahead of time, assessed, and controlled for in analysis. Prospective studies of death of spouse (43, 73) come closest to this idealized design, whereas other studies, such as of permanent plant shutdown (19) or involuntary relocation of elderly residents (107), have a difficulty establishing true baseline data prior to the anticipation period. In general, environmental exposures that are most clearly beyond the control of an individual (thereby tending to minimize self-selection processes) are also most difficult to study prospectively from the time prior to exposure, e.g. natural disasters (133), industrial accidents (103), or acts of terrorism (6). On the other hand, exposures that can be well anticipated and studied with adequate baseline, such as retirement at age 65, suffer from severe self-selection problems, particularly those related to health status, commitment to work, financial circumstances, and anticipatory behavior (96). Studies of effects of exposure to environments that are selected completely voluntarily and that are richly embedded in the life cycle dynamics, such as moves to the suburbs or to retirement communities (93, 108), are perhaps the most difficult to interpret even with elegant prospective designs. Various types of departures from the above idealized design may pose problems for causal interpretation of results. Thus a study that is not prospective with respect to exposure but is begun by selecting two cohorts according to exposed vs unexposed status may run into difficulties because of lack of baseline data and because it may be unable to reconstruct the process of attrition from pre-exposure to the time the subjects are recruited into the study. Thus a longitudinal survey of elderly, initially selected by widowed (exposed) vs married (unexposed) status, misses out on the widowed in poor health who have already died (or are institutionalized) and the widowed in good health who are more likely to remarry (71). Controlling on initial health status differences between widowed and married at the start of the study may overcorrect if these differences are actually attributable to exposure that took place prior to the start of the study. A detailed discussion of these methodological issues with respect to specific experiences such as migration, unemployment, retirement, and institutionalization has been offered elsewhere (96, 98, 102, 108). Fully retrospective studies in which cases with disease are compared to selected controls on prior exposure status may have the same problem of reconstructing the process of attrition from before to after exposure, as well as the additional problem of attrition from before to after disease onset (or after prodromal symptoms). The presence of disease tends to influence the data collection process when one depends on self-report or the subjective reports by others, and this becomes often another area of serious concern. And case control studies may also be weak because of lack of representativeness of cases or of dubious appropriateness of the controls for the particular inferences one wishes to draw. Admittedly, retrospective case control studies are most vulnerable when the measure of exposure is subjective, an issue taken up in the following section. It must be recognized that in specific instances there may be ambiguity regarding the relevance of a particular environmental exposure for the stress formulation. Thus, for example, a recent analysis of the Tecumseh data for a number of disease outcomes conceptualized multiple moves in childhood as early life stressors (134). However, a study of multiple sclerosis viewed such multiple moves in childhood as a greater opportunity for exposure to a rare environmental agent (182). Similarly, in studies of health effects of noise it is difficult to separate the effects of noise as a physical stimulus from effects of noise as an environmental stressor (23, 57, 114), or even how precisely to conceptualize this difference. Of course, such dilemmas would recede if we had a good understanding of the causal pathways and the mechanisms involved: we would describe the process and not worry about whether the concept of stress does or does not need to be invoked.
Stress as Reaction to an Environmental Condition
The preceding section dealt with methodological concerns in studies in which the risk factor for a disease outcome is stressful environmental exposure, but in which there is little controversy regarding the fact of exposure. The situation changes when the risk factor is subjective (perceived) exposure or an apparent reaction to exposure. For example, in a study of changes in cholesterol among tax accountants (52), the period before the April 15 deadline was used as an objective indication of stress (overload), while daily entries in their diaries were used as indices of subjective stress. Similarly, in a study of effects of airport noise (173, 183), the Noise and Number Index was the objective measure of exposure, whereas reports of being bothered and annoyed by the noise was the subjective index. In this section I discuss new methodological concerns that accrue to studies using a subjective measure of exposure. Of course, any of the problems listed in the last section may be applicable as well. When only a subjective measure of environmental exposure is included as a risk factor, we have two primary problems: (a) we cannot be sure to what objective exposure the subjective measure can be linked (and how strongly), thus making it risky to plan ameliorative intervention, and (b) we cannot be sure that we are dealing with a reaction to an exposure in the first place, as opposed to an enduring characteristic of the person that manifests itself irrespective of any level or type of environmental challenge. These problems apply even when we are dealing with a clean prospective design. For example, in a prospective study of angina pectoris among 10,000 Israeli men (132), those who reported problems with co-workers and with supervisors (such as "being hurt" or "not being appreciated by them") were at greater risk for later angina. But it is impossible to tell what actual working conditions these reports might indicate, or even whether this has anything to do with work environment per se, but reflects instead general neuroticism or some similar characteristic or trait. Another example comes from several prospective studies of myocardial infarction (MI) that have shown that a specific area of symptoms and complaints sleep disturbance, feeling tired on awakening, unable to relax, exhausted at the end of the day-is indicative of higher risk for MI (84). However, no environmental antecedents for these symptoms have been established and it is rather likely that they represent a preexisting vulnerability unrelated to environmental conditions. Subjective measures of environmental exposure become more problematic when utilized in retrospective case-control designs. A couple of examples from the heart disease literature can illustrate this point. Studies of public beliefs about causes of heart attacks (130, 162) reveal that "stress, worry, nervous tension, pressure" is the most frequently stated cause and ahead of the accepted biological risk factors. Consequently, retrospective accounts of heart attack victims about their premorbid life circumstances are likely to be influenced by a "search for meaning," an attribution process that increases the tendency to report stress or pressure or overwork for the period before the heart attack. Furthermore, because it has been established that higher levels of anxiety and distress are a consequence ofMI, but are not its antecedents (82), retrospective accounts among MI cases of their premorbid circumstances are also likely to be influenced by these higher levels of distress at the time of data collection. What is not clear is the extent to which measures that by content appear relatively distant to concepts of anxiety and distress (e.g. marital satisfaction) still could be substantially vulnerable to biasing influences of the disease and its sequelae in retrospective accounts. When a study includes both objective and subjective measures of environmental exposure, we are in a better position to interpret the results. If the objective measure is confirmed as a risk factor for disease outcome, and the subjective measure is associated with both the objective measure and the disease outcome (and the latter two associations are stronger than the first), then we have a substantial suggestion of a disease effect of environmental exposure, operating primarily through the intervening process of subjective perception or reaction. When the objective and subjective measures are not correlated with each other-and this is frequently the case, particularly in the occupational stress literature (94, l43)-and only the SUbjective measure is related to disease outcome, then we have a strong suggestion that (a) we have not identified properly the actual environmental exposure, or (b) the subjective measure has its linkages to a personal characteristic rather than environmental exposure, or (c) the presence of disease (in retrospective designs) has biased the subjective measure. When the objective and subjective measures of environmental exposure are substantially associated with each other but only the latter relates to the disease outcome [as was actually found in the above-mentioned study (173, 183) of airport noise], then we have a more puzzling set of associations, an intervening variable which doesn't intervene. The likely explanation is that the subjective measure of exposure has multiple determinants, only some of which are related to disease.
Measures of Distress and of Personal Traits as Stress Risk Factors
The two remaining categories of risk factors in the overall domain of stress and disease studies, those of distress and personal traits, pose methodological concerns that can be discussed briefly since, in part, they are derivative of the issues already raised. It was noted above that when we think we have implicated environmental exposure (objectively determined or subjectively assessed) as the risk factor for disease, the proper interpretation may in reality be in terms of state/trait variables as the underlying risk factor. Now, the caution can be reversed: an interpretation of state/trait as the underlying risk factor may be threatened by an inadequate understanding of the influence of environmental exposure. To be sure, the distinction between these alternatives is relatively unimportant in early stages of research, when our first objective is to show we have a credible risk factor that is not confounded with known biological risks and is not the consequence of the disease. However, the mere identification of a risk factor becomes rapidly insufficient as we attempt to develop effective intervention strategies or gain a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanisms of disease causation. The major dilemma in working with state/trait variables is that they are often so plausibly seen as indicating the impact of the disease, not its antecedents. Consequently, their credibility as risk factors is difficult to establish except in the context of prospective study designs. However, the disadvantage of such a design-aside from their well-documented difficulty and expense, particularly for relatively rare diseases with unknown (biological) etiology-is that we are likely to detect only the chronic predisposing factors and miss out on the more acute precipitating factors. And generally it is the latter set of risk factors that are closer to revealing something about the underlying mechanisms. Furthermore, sometimes acute and chronic stress risk factors may show opposite associations with a particular disease outcome (e.g. 44), in which case the long-term prospective studies that detect the more chronic risk factors will paint a misleading picture. 
ILLUSTRATIVE RESEARCH ON STRESS AND DISEASE
At this point the reader should have some sense of the conceptual and methodological issues that dominate the stress and disease literature. In this section I wish to offer a selective review of and commentary on some of the research that has been done. The work is grouped according to several dominant themes or concerns: cardiovascular disease, cancer, stress at work, stressful life events, and biological mechanisms. Although this classification captures nicely the major research topics, it is, of course, not a rational, non-overlapping schema: two topics are disease outcomes, two are types of environmental exposure, and one zeroes in on intermediate processes. Page limitations of this review prevent specific consideration of other diseases for which the stress literature, particularly from the "psychosomatic" viewpoint (185), is not negligible, e.g. peptic ulcer, bronchial asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, juvenile diabetes, and Crohn's disease (13, 18, 53, 87, 145, 171, 184).
Cardiovascular Disease
A number of reviews of the literature on stress and cardiovascular disease are available (e.g. 22, 41,42, 44, 67,78, 82, 83,84, 97, 129) and provide an easy entree into it. The major manifestations most often studied are angina pectoris, myocardial infarction, and sudden death. It is necessary to maintain a separation among these since the risk factor picture may sometimes be clearly different. Thus, indices of neuroticism, anxiety, and distress relate prospectively to angina, while they appear to be only the consequence of MI (82). One also needs to maintain other distinctions, such as between sudden death (i.e. the first manifestation of coronary heart disease) and coronary heart disease mortality in general, which reflects death certificate diagnosis irrespective of presence of previous morbidity. The latter may be sensitive to many variables that influence case fatality, including socioeconomic status, medical care, depression, and so on (100). Prospective studies that include multivariate adjustments for established risk factors (particularly age, blood pressure, serum cholesterol, smoking status) have yielded the most convincing "stress" predictors. It was noted above that for MI, a certain cluster of symptoms and complaints (poor sleep, exhaustion, inability to relax) appears as a confirmed risk factor (84). Recent evidence has begun to implicate hostility, including the concept of suppressed hostility, as another likely risk factor for coronary heart disease (4, 70, 160). The finding that hostility is also associated with prevalence of clinically significant atherosclerosis, as determined from coronary arteriography (188), should further increase our interest in this variable. Other risk factors have, in the past, appeared promising but confirmation from newer studies has not been obtained. For example, the areas of status incongruity and social mobility seemed to point to promising classes of environmental exposures (82), but the more recent accumulation of data (84) suggests otherwise: we see negative findings and no advance in our understanding of what exactly these variables might be measuring that would be increased risk for heart disease. Variables such as occupational mobility are measured in a relatively general and superficial way, thus yielding negative (116) or inconsistent (8) findings. Research on Type A behavior as a risk factor for coronary heart disease remains as the centerpiece and the prototype of social-epidemiological studies of stress and disease. The concept is defined by a multitude of attributes: hard-driving effort, striving for achievement, competitiveness, aggressiveness, haste, impatience, restlessness, alertness, hurried motor movements. It is conceptualized as the result of a predisposition, stimulated by appropriate environmental challenges (32, 178). Several major prospective studies have confirmed its status as a risk factor, but strikingly different measurement procedures were used (10, 50, 69). The most recent data, involving analysis of coronary death in the MRFIT clinical trial, however, have failed to show an association with Type A behavior (161); the assessment of Type A was done by the structured interview method, the recommended procedure. Within studies, relationships may only hold for subgroups: in Framingham, for example, Type A was a significant risk factor only for men in white collar jobs (vs blue collar) and housewives (vs working women) (69). Across studies, Type A may relate to different aspects of coronary disease: in Framingham, it was related to angina but not to uncomplicated MI (69), whereas in a Belgian study, it was related to MI and sudden death but not angina (50). Angiographic studies relating Type A to degree of atherosclerosis have not been very consistent in their results (84). There is still a considerable drift in the conceptualization of Type A behavior and in its measurement, and the accumulating picture is increasingly more complex to summarize. It is likely that major advances in our knowledge will come when: (a) we are able to pin down more precisely the component of this broad construct that is involved as a coronary risk factor, and (b) we begin to study more closely the environmental challenges that stimulate this behavior. Retrospective case-control studies continue to be carried out on MI patients and controls-perhaps with somewhat greater sensitivity to the limitations of such a design-but it remains a matter of speculation (and healthy skepticism) the extent to which the various measures are influenced by the fact of disease, and wouldn't show that association in a prospective design. For example, one study (141) showed that patients with ischemic heart disease reported more stress (dissatisfactions, conflicts, major changes) for the five years prior to onset, even after adjusting for standard risk factors. Unfortunately, such adjustments do nothing for the biases one worries about. Studies have suggested that European male patients with heart disease report excess stresses in the work setting, while American male patients report excess stresses in the family setting, (140, 165). This pattern of results (cultural and role specificity of reported stress) represents solid etiological clues only if we assume that biases of recall due to disease are invariant across countries and content areas. However, the fact that European male MI patients report more "nervous stress" during the previous ten years, even as the controls (not the patients) are more likely to be found in work settings where the work pace is hectic (objectively determined), is only going to increase our scepticism about such retrospective accounts (131).
Cancer
A number of very useful and comprehensive reviews of psychosocial risk factors in cancer are available (13, 26, 31, 44, 46, 47, 48, 78, 121, 129, 136, 166); some authors have offered particularly good analyses of methodological problems (e.g. 46, 136). Psychosocial variables may be related to cancer in a variety of ways, including: (a) influences on exposure status, such as smoking, alcohol consumption, sexual hygiene, and occupational carcinogens; and (b) medical care behaviors, including participation in screening, delay in recognition of symptoms and in acting upon the presence of symptoms, and compliance to medical regimen. The role of stress in influencing these behavioral pathways should not be underestimated. The presumptive biological pathway between stress and cancer involves various parameters of immunological functioning, which can promote initiation of cancers as well as their progression. However, as the reviews of the research indicate (1, 2, 48, 123, 147, 169), linkages between stress or distress and heightened susceptibility or immunosuppression are likely to be complex. The immune system is a complicated network and a variety of factors in the host, in the challenge to the host, and in the chronicity and intensity of the challenge must be also considered. Because of this complexity, one finds that stress may enhance as well as decrease susceptibility to disease. Reviewers' conclusions, such as that coping style of emotional suppression is related to lower levels of natural killer cell activity, which in tum leads to a more rapid progression of the disease (121), are better seen as working hypotheses than as definitive interpretations. There are major difficulties in studying the role of stress in cancer. Because of the typically long latent period between tumor initiation and first possible detection, long prospective intervals (or stable predictors) are needed in prospective studies between initial data collection and follow-up involving clinical detection. Furthermore, high variability in pretreatment symptom progression (for some cancers), which would correlate with post-treatment outcomes, makes it more difficult to study in an unconfounded way the psychological influences on progression of disease. And the tremendous psychological impact of the disease itself makes retrospective case-control studies of stress variables particularly difficult. There are not many long-term prospective studies of psychological variables in cancer, and often they involve unusual concepts, measured in ways that have little a priori reliability or validity. These include ratings of substable personality in a Swedish study (65), scoring subjects on how much they were "passive receivers of repression" in a Yugoslav study (63), and various scoring schema for projective tests such as the Rorschach (60) and the Draw-a-Person Test (68) in the well-known study of John Hopkins medical students. The study that reported that greater emotional and behavioral distance to parents is a predictor of cancer among medical students (179) appears a more trustworthy finding, particularly since later analyses (158) revealed the specific importance of the father-son relationship, and showed that the prospective association survived statistical controls for smoking, drinking, and radiation exposure. Established scales such as those derived from the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), have also been used in prospective analyses and there is some evidence that dependency (61) and depression (163) may be predictors of later cancer. In none of this work do the risk factors illuminate actual etiological processes; they only serve to tantalize our imaginations. We must also be on the lookout for presence or absence of disease specificity. For example, greater emotional distance was also found to be related to suicide (179), dependency was a predictor for a variety of other illnesses (61), and depression is often a predictor of case fatality in other illnesses (100). The design of studying an undifferentiated group of patients awaiting biopsy results, and trying to predict for whom the later biopsy will reveal malignancy, has been used by some investigators as a compromise between a prospective and a retrospective design that may eliminate some of the bias due to the impact of the disease itself (e. g. 62, 76, 189). The results are not easy to interpret and the predictors do not fit a compelling cluster; this may be because data analysis involves often a purely statistical search among a large set of predictors. Replication of results becomes a necessity if we are to avoid capitalizing on chance (154, 155). Nevertheless, some authors (e.g. 31) feel that this literature justifies the hypothesis that inability to express hostile feelings or having an abnormal release of emotions in general relate to increased risk for cancer. Case fatality studies have linked survival to greater emotional expressiveness (e.g. 33, 58), and thus they tend to strengthen the above hypothesis. Purely retrospective studies continue to be done-and may reveal more about coping with cancer than about its antecedents. One study of children with cancer (mostly leukemia) and controls (81) revealed that 32% of mothers of cases, compared to 90% of mothers of controls, described the original pregnancy as "planned. " One may well wonder if this represents a pathetic and desperate effort on the part of the mother to "reinterpret" the fact and the meaning of a dreaded disease in a small child.
Stress at Work
A number of reviews and overviews of the large literature concerning stress at work make this research area relatively easily accessible (28, 29, 30, 75, 77, 88, 89, 94, 101, 106, 119, 127, 128, 137, 164). However, a good deal of it deals with psychological and behavioral outcomes, rather than physical health. The brief discussion of illustrative research that follows concentrates on cardiovascular disease in order to enhance the linkage to the earlier section. A number of different approaches have been utilized, including analyses of morbidity and mortality by occupational categories. Thus, for example, teachers-professors have mortality rates of arteriosclerotic heart disease that are only about one half of the rates for physicians-lawyers-pharmacists-insurance agents. These are jobs of roughly comparable social status, level of physical activity, and physical health hazards, and it is not unreasonable to point to work demands as a possible clue. Within a single occupational group, physicians, there are differences by specialities that again suggestively implicate stressful or demanding work settings; for example, general practitioners show higher rates of mortality and morbidity than specialists. And in a specific organizational setting, such as NASA, prevalence of heart disease was observed to be higher for managers than for scientists and engineers [see earlier review (94) for details of these studies]. The best studies exploit research opportunities presented by "natural" experiments. In one study (110), two male cohorts of employees were followed prospectively for ten years; those who worked for a commercial bank in which there was a lot of competition and a good deal of risk and responsibility in investing funds had higher rates of coronary heart disease than those who worked for a semipublic savings bank with less competition and fewer responsibilities. Inter-bank differences were particularly great for men who had higher initial levels of cardiovascular risk factors. These findings are rather compelling since initially the banks were similar and changes in management policy created differences after most had already joined the bank. Another strategy has been to zero in on particular aspects of the work setting; among these, jobs or organizational roles associated with overload, excessive demands, and many responsibilities are thought to represent settings of high coronary heart disease risk. This is a plausible hypothesis but it has received spotty support. It has been difficult to pin down the relevant variables (excessive hours, more than one full-time job, high levels of responsibility for people or equipment, frequent deadlines, many sources of work demands, etc) as well as the organizational and interpersonal resources that might perhaps buffer the effects of stress. In this connection, particularly attractive is the hypothesis that work settings where there is high job demand and low decision latitude will represent increased risk for heart disease (90, 91). It would seem that the pathogenic process that links the work setting to disease outcomes has some of the following characteristics: (a) the stressful work condition tends to be chronic rather than intermittent or self-limiting; (b) there is external pacing of work demands, such as that created by machines, payment mechanisms, or competition; (c) habituation or adaptation to the chronic situation is difficult and, instead, some fonn of vigilance or arousal must be maintained; (d) failure to meet demands leads to drastic consequences (equipment, lives, money); (e) there is a "spillover" of the effect of the work role to other areas of functioning (e.g. family, leisure) so that the daily impact of the demanding job situation becomes cumulative and health threatening, rather than being daily defused or erased. This summary is based on a review of a great deal of the relevant literature (1 ° 1). The job of the air traffic controller appears paradigmatic for this type of analysis (20, 149); the observations of excess cardiac mortality among West Gennan sea pilots (191) and curtailed longevity among train dispatchers before the advent of electronic equipment (124) also fit this analysis.
Stressful Life Events
The literature on stressful life events contains two quite different types of studies: (a) those which focus on a single event, or experience, or exposure and examine its health consequences; and (b) those which use a single instrument, such as the Holmes-Rahe Social Readjustment Rating Scale (74), in which a long list of events is included and a person receives a single (usually weighted) summative score, depending on the number and types of events he/she experienced during a specified period of time. It should be fairly obvious from the discussion of methodological issues above that the prospects for better research designs reside with the first class of studies. Among specific events that have been examined and about which reasonable evidence has been accumulated one can list bereavement (45, 71, 73, 79, 80, 111, 142), retirement (16, 40, 96, 135, 150, 152), and unemployment (11, 12, 17, 19, 24, 86, 98, 104, 105, 168). The research literature on other experiences, such as migration, institutionalization, residential moves, and natural disasters is also fairly substantial (e.g. 37, 92, 93, 102, 107, 108, 133). It is impossible to evaluate this large body of research within the limited space of this review. Clearly, different issues dominate each of these research topics. With respect to retirement, for example, there is overwhelming evidence (and high agreement among reviewers) that adverse physical health effects have not been demonstrated. It remains to be seen whether there are identifiable, specific subgroups of individuals in specific occupations who have high attachment to the work role and who, when forced to retire, do experience adverse effects. It is also not clear whether retirement aggravates the effects of other experiences (e.g. geographic moves) that might be taking place concurrently. With respect to unemployment research, the current controversy is mostly methodological: much of the infonnation comes from ecological analyses of aggregated data and it is not clear how much faith one can put into them (95). With respect to bereavement, the results showing higher mortality of the bereaved are quite impressive, though not completely conclusive. However, it is not quite clear whether we are dealing with an acute event or the chronic status of the widowed (or unmarried), what characteristics of persons and of marriage confer higher vulnerability, and what the underlying mechanisms might be. The recent data on changes in lymphocyte function point in one direction (5, 153), but it is likely that changes in life-style and health habits following bereavement are also involved. The research on stressful life events that is based on inventories listing many events plunges one into considerable methodological controversy. Some of these issues have been raised earlier and have been analyzed in some detail elsewhere (e.g. 36,99). The basic difficulty is that the measure of events that is examined as a risk factor for disease is a mixed bag. It includes: (a) concrete events that happened, over which people had little control; (b) concrete events into which people generally select themselves; (c) vague events with unclear referents inviting recall and response biases to operate; and (d) "events" that are actually behaviors of the person and reflect level of functioning (including disease impact) and state/trait dimensions. Older reviews and compilations of the literature on stressful life events (e.g. 35, 64, 67, 146, 176) suggest a rather impressive accumulation of evidence. However, a closer examination reveals a most disturbing trend: prospective longitudinal studies, particularly those that involve careful statistical adjustments for necessary covariates, including prior symptoms or health status, have tended to yield negative findings, showing no effect of stressful life events (e.g. 9, 54, 55, 112, 125, 151, 187). Thus a much more careful reading of the literature will be needed to isolate the trustworthy and replicable findings. For example, it would appear that stressful life events may be a risk factor for such outcomes as complications of pregnancy and accidents/injuries (21, 139, 146). It will also be desirable to look for associations between specific types of events and specific disease outcomes; the prospective data from a Swedish study of MI (175, 177) support this contention.
Biological Mechanisms
The recent overview of the evidence on stress and disease (43) notes emphatically that very few studies examine all three components in the general paradigm: stressor biological mechanism or reaction health status change. Instead we have mostly studies that omit the intervening step, or study it only as the consequence of the stressor or the antecedent to disease. The intervening biological variables that are studied tend to fall into two classes: (a) those which are indicators of stress, such as corticosteroids or catecholamines (7), and (b) those which are known risk factors for disease, such as blood pressure or serum cholesterol. One problem with the first class, the indicators of stress, is that some are not easily linked to disease outcomes. This is true for the indicators of endocrine function, and even for the many indicators of immunological functioning that are available for study (1, 48, 123, 169). Another problem is that some of these indicators may have their own patterns of reactivity which may not make them suitable as predictors of disease risk. For example, a recent review of the evidence on endocrine responses to stress (148) reveals many instances in which the endocrine responses, though sensitive to acute stressors, undergo extinction when the individuals are re-exposed to those stressors, or are exposed to chronic stressors; this appears more true of cortisol than of catecholamines. This evidence leaves one wondering whether the extinction of the endocrine response in the face of chronic stress indicates a reduction in disease risk, or only suggests that endocrine responses are unsuitable for monitoring disease risk in the face of chronic stressors. A recent article (14) informs us that in setting up the distinction between acute and chronic stressors, we have tended to neglect the intermittent but repeated stressors whose impact we do not yet understand (10 1) . The problem with the second class of intervening biological variables, the known risk factors for specific diseases, is that their linkage to acute stressors (particularly under laboratory conditions) is relatively easy to establish, but the evidence of linkage between chronic exposure to stressors and chronic (or irreversible) elevations is extremely limited. And it is a matter of faith, rather than inductive logic, to assume that one can simply extrapolate from the evidence on acute stressors and predict chronic elevations should those stressors persist. Recent reviews of the research literature on blood pressure and serum cholesterol (34, 115, 159, 172, 180) amply document such a limitation of the evidence. The study of biological mechanisms, embedded in a larger study of stressors and disease outcomes, is a most valuable research strategy to pursue. Such studies, though difficult to accomplish, should prove helpful in advancing our understanding both of the impact of the stressor on disease and of the role of the biological variables as disease risk indicators. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS
 My intent in this review is twofold: (a) to facilitate for the reader access to a large research literature on stress and health, and (b) to sensitize the reader to the many difficult methodological issues that inhere in these studies. The conclusion that "stress can cause illness" remains completely tenable; however, such a conclusion is also nearly meaningless. It is hoped that the reader, armed with this review, will be stimulated to investigate on his/her own the details of such a general conclusion, and will be able to strike a suitable balance between uncritical acceptance and nihilistic rejection of the evidence.