Women, Work, and Welfare: Is There a Role for Social Work?
THE SOCIAL WORK profession's interest in poverty issues and in work with poor families and individuals has diminished during the past two decades (Gummer, 1979; Wyers, 1980, 1983). Explaining this ebbing interest requires consideration of societal and professional developments. One reason for social workers' reluctance to work with poor families and individuals has, like poor people, always been with us-working with poor people does nothing to enhance the professional's status. The quest for professional status by social workers began early in this century and is reflected today in the continual struggle for increased credentials and in social workers' identifying themselves as psychotherapists (Lubove, 1980; Moss, 1990; Trattner, 1989). Developments in public policy and in policymakers' regard for social work also explain the withdrawal of the social work profession from public welfare, particularly from public assistance. One critical development was the perceived failure of social work to keep its promise of reducing Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) caseloads by providing casework services in the early 1960s (Trattner, 1989). Another factor was the federal requirement in the 1970s that public welfare separate income maintenance functions from social services (see Benton, 1980; Hoshino, 1972). Along with other factors, this separation opened the door to declassification of positions in public welfare that once had been considered professional social work positions (Karger, 1983; Pecora & Austin, 1983). Other factors included the withdrawal of training and education monies for social workers and the removal of social workers from policymaking positions in public welfare at all levels of government (Trattner, 1989).
JanL.Hagen Is there a role for the profession of social work and social work practitioners in public assistance policy and programs? Today's public welfare environment is driven by the nation's most recent variation on welfare reform as embodied in the Family Support Act of 1988. This article reviews the Family SupportAct, focusing on the welfare-to-work programs, and discusses the implications of this legislation for social work roles in public welfare. Roles are delineated in direct practice, management, policy analysis, staff development, advocacy, and research.
Is there a role today for the social work profession and practitioners in public assistance policy and programs? Does the profession have a responsibility to reinvest and recommit its resources and expertise in working with public assistance recipients? As a profession, social work has always accepted its responsibility to advocate for poor people. But Beyond the profession's call to address poverty issues and policy analyses of a few social work scholars such as Abramovitz (1988a), Miller (1989), and Ozawa (1982, 1986, 1989), where does social work fit in today's public welfare environment? Today's public welfare environment is driven by the nation's most recent variation on welfare reform, embodied in the Family Support Act (FSA) of 1988. This article reviews the FSA with a focus on welfare-to-work programs. The implications of the legislation for the role of social work in public welfare are considered.
Family Support Act of 1988 Passed in October 1988, the FSA was hailed as a "new consensus" on welfare reform by liberals and conservatives and as the most sweeping revision in the nation's welfare system in 50 years. The act passedCongresswith overwhelming bipartisan support following two years of congressional hearings, debates, and joint sessions. The strong bipartisan support more accurately reflects skillful political compromise between liberals and conservatives in Congress rather than a new consensus on welfare. This new consensus has not been replicated in state legislatures struggling to pass the enabling legislation required for states to participate in the FSA(Lurie Sanger, 1991). The act is not a radical departure from previousAFDClegislation;rather, it extends and builds on earlier legislation that provided for child support enforcement and welfare-to-work initiatives. The legislation emphasizes the short-term,temporary nature of public assistance. The latitude given to states in welfare-to-work programs begun under the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981 and the new federalism are maintained by reserving to state discretion the composition of program components and the method of service delivery. What is new is a recognition that all parents, regardless of income, have an obligation to financially support their children. The legislation sends a clear message to AFDC mothers that even those with preschool children are expected to work if child care is available. FSA's major provisions are to provide transitional child care and Medicaid benefits for 12 months to families who become ineligible for AFDC through increased earnings or loss of income disregards (income not considered in AFDC benefit calculations); to further the enforcement of child support; and to establish job opportunities and basic skills (JOBS) training programs to provide education, training, and employment to AFDC recipients. AFDC-UP (AFDC-unemployed parents) programs, to be provided in all states under the FSA, would provide two-parent families with at least six months ofAFDC support and for Medicaid coverage as long as the family is financially eligible. AFDC-UP programs currently operate in 23 states and represent an important legislative initiative to address one of the longstanding inequities of the AFDC program. However, the legislation allows states to require that at least one parent in an AFDC-UP family engage in a work activity such as on-the-job training or a workfare program for at least 16 hours a week in exchange for benefits. The new legislation also focuses on reducing welfare dependency and targeted services to those at high risk for long-term welfare dependency.
Transitional Benefits
The provision of child care and Medicaid benefits for up to 12 months following ineligibility for AFDC recognizes the need for a transition period between receipt of full benefits and cessation of benefits. These transitional benefits are envisioned as a bridge for JOBS participants between welfare dependency and economic self-sufficiency. Important issues remain unresolved regarding ensuring access to these benefits and charging premiums in the last six months of Medicaid eligibility.
Enforcement of Child Support
The new child support enforcement provisions extend previous legislation by mandating immediate wage withholding for all cases served by the Office Child Support Enforcement. This provision of the FSA should have some advantages for many women who retain custody of their children following divorce. The economic consequences of divorce on women and their children have been well documented (Duncan& Morgan, 1979; Weitzman, 1981), and the lack of adequate child support payments is one of the critical factors that contribute to the poor economic status of divorced mothers and their children (Garfinkel & McLanahan, 1986). Beginning in 1994, however, immediate wage withholding will be required for all support orders, whether or not the Office of Child Support Enforcement is involved. Thus, automatic wage withholding will become universal for all court orders of child support. Further, guidelines previously established by the states for child support awards are now presumptive. Other policy issues that remain are the adequacy and equity of the formulas developed by states for establishing child support awards, the resulting inequities across states, and the provision of a state-guaranteed minimal benefit for each child regardless of parental earnings. A less obvious issue is the effect of child support enforcement on family relationships in poor families. For poor families, the benefit of automatic wage withholding for child support is questionable. As Abramovitz (1988b) noted, for poor fathers, this provision "maybe more like squeezing blood from a stone" (p. 239). Further, this additional demand on an already limited income may impair the relationship between the parents. A negative or adversarial relationship between parents has the potential for disrupting ties with the extended kin network, thereby cutting off the mother and her children from important sources of informal instrumental and emotional support.
Job Opportunities and Basic Skills Training Program Program Outline.
The JOBS program is the major vehicle by which FSA seeks to increase the economic self-sufficiency ofAFDC recipients. By October 1990, all states were required to implement a JOBS program to ensure that needy families with children obtain education, training, and employment to help them avoid long-term welfare dependence. Placing primary responsibilityforJOBSwith the state's welfare agency, theFSArequiresstates to offer educational activities including high school or equivalent education, basic and remedial education, English proficiency education,job skills training, job readiness activities, and job development and placement. Additionally, states must provide at least two of the following: group and individual job searches, on-the-job training, work supplementation, and community work experience. Unless they are exempted or the JOBS program is not available in their political subdivision, all AFDC recipients are required to participate in child care is available. In a significant departure from previous legislation, mothers with children three years or older (or one year or older at state option) are required to participate if child care is available. Mothers under 20 years who have not completed high school or its equivalent are required to participate in educational activities, regardless of their children's ages. States Must Guarantee child care if it is necessary for an adult recipient to participate in the JOBS program. This care may be provided directly, contracted for with providers, or provided indirectly by cash payments or vouchers to recipients. Federal funding for child care is open-ended and matched at the Medicaid rate for the states, which ranges from 50 to 80 percent. To encourage states to focus on those most likely to become long-term welfare recipients and to avoid "creaming" (the provision of services to those with the fewest barriers to employment), the law specifies that 55 percent of the funds be spent on three target groups: (1) families in which the parent is under age 24 and has not completed high school or has had little or no work experience in the preceding year, (2) families in which the youngest child is within two years of becoming ineligible because of age, and (3) families who have received assistance for 36 or more months in the past five years. The JOBS legislation establishes overall participation rates for state JOBS programs. Seven percent of the nonexempt caseload must participate in fiscal years 1990 and 1991; 20 percent must participate by 1995 ifstates are to receive matching funds authorized under JOBS. More money than before is being allocated to this welfare employment program. The cap on federal entitlement funding for JOBS is $800 million in 1990 and will rise to $1.3 billion in 1995, for a total funding package of approximately $3.5 billion over five years. Challenges Faced. Can JOBS bring about meaningful changes in the lives of AFDC mothers? Stoesz and Karger (1990) concluded that the likelihood of "significant change in the welfare system is virtually nonexistent" (p. 147). Miller's(1989) analysis of previous work programs led her to predict marginal welfare savings, strong incentives for marriage, the perpetuation of women's dependence, and the continued denigration of "welfare mothers" because when the programs fail to meet expectations, administrators and politicians blame the participants-not the design of the programs(the real culprit). This "failure" will serve capitalism, patriarchy, and white supremacy by, once again, preserving a cheap pool of labor and by, once again, proving that women, especially black women, cannot make it on their own. (p. 20) These clearly are the dangers. And by itself, JOBS, at its best, can have only a minimal effect on the poverty of AFDC mothers and their children. Nichols-Casebolt and McClure (1989) accurately stated that most welfare reform proposals, including JOBS, do not consider the availability of jobs or the structure of the labor market. About one-third of the full-time jobs open to women do not pay enough to support a mother and two children above the poverty line. The projected area of growth for jobs in the next decade will be low-wage, low-skills jobs (Nichols-Casebolt & McClure, 1989). Additionally, sexual and racial discrimination continue to characterize the job market, further limiting opportunities for women, particularly women of color (Nichols-Casebolt & McClure, 1989). Although constraints in the economy and the structure of the labor market must be recognized and addressed, JOBS does offer the potential for providing new opportunities for poor women to obtain the education and training necessary to compete for meaningful jobs in the labor market. Training, education, and child care are also a necessary part of the strategy to improve the well-being of women and their children. Achieving this potential rests with the willingness and ability of states to commit their own resources to JOBS, as well as the ways states choose to implement the JOBS programs. The implementation of the JOBS program presents a major challenge to state and local governments. Will the JOBS requirements penetrate welfare agencies, and will agencies have the capacity to implement the ambitions of this legislation? Will the education, training, and support services provided to recipients produce increased employment and reduced welfare dependency? Whether JOBS produces these outcomes depends not on the AFDC mothers but on the design and administration of services by state and local welfare agencies. Roles for Social Workers Some states have begun to propose and implement strategies for work with welfare mothers. The following are examples of such initiatives: • New designs for reducing service fragmentation are being developed, including New York City's new community-based initiative to provide social services where people live (Buder, 1990). • Administrators are beginning to expect that income maintenance workers will provide some of the social services families need. • Case management systems are being attached to some states' comprehensive employment and training programs (Greenberg & Levin-Epstein, 1989). • Iowa is targeting comprehensive social services interventions to multiproblem families (Bruner, 1990). These examples represent areas where social workers have expertise; some are initiatives that represent the profession's traditional functions. Roles for social workers in the implementation of JOBS programs exist in direct practice, management, staff development and training, policy analysis and advocacy, and research
Direct Practice
The most obvious direct practice role for social work is in case management provided for by the JOBS legislation. States have the option of using case managers to assist recipients in participating in the JOBS program. The models for case management and roles of case managers will be developed at the state and local levels. Social work could have an instrumental role in developing models that build on the participants' strengths, empower AFDC mothers, and broker services and advocate on the client's behalf for necessary support services. These services may extend beyond the education and training provision of JOBS to include the other social services that families may need. A range of case management models are currently in use. In some instances, case management is viewed as monitoring of client progress on paper only, a function sometimes performed by specially trained clerical staff. In other instances, personnel are drawn from other vocational education and training programs. In Iowa's program to serve multiproblem families, family development specialists are used. To date, there is not much social work presence in the development of case management models. The JOBS program also requires state welfare agencies to develop individualized employment plans and services for participants based on an initial assessment of their education, work experience, employment skills, family circumstances, and supportive services needs including child care. At state option, the assessment may also include the needs of the children. To develop meaningful employability plans, these assessments must be comprehensive and must involve the client as a mutual partner. Complex decisions must be made about such issues as child care arrangements and what family circumstances will constitute deferral from the JOBS program. Social workers are well-prepared to conduct a thorough psychosocial assessment. The increased attention to child care offers additional opportunities for social workers. The legislation requires that child care be guaranteed if required for an individual to participate in JOBS programs. In arranging child care, the individual needs of the child must be considered. Funding is available to improve state child care licensing requirements and to allow for monitoring of child care to AFDC children. Vosler and Ozawa's (1990) preliminary findings from an evaluation of two pilot welfare-to-work programs in St. Louis suggest the importance of social work activity at the neighborhood and community level. Their findings suggest that a proactive and supportive community is a critical variable inenablingAFDC mothers to enter work force. The neighborhood-based approach incorporates central tenets of social work practice and is characterized by "targeting change at multiple system levels, focusing on enabling both personal and family system reorganization, empowering personal choice as the path to change, and a program based on grassroots leadership development and mutual self-help" (Vosler & Ozawa, 1988, p. 20). Vosler and Ozawa (1990) argued for educating social work practitioners skilled at interventions on multiple systems levels who can connect practice knowledge, policy analysis, and human behavior in providing service to "already vulnerable women and children" (p. 12) participating in JOBS programs.
Management
Perhaps the major administrative challenge facing welfare managers is to change the culture of the welfare organization from an emphasis on financial support and fiscal accuracy to an emphasis on service delivery. Or, as Kosterlitz (1989) described the challenge, "States are struggling to get welfare agency officials to act more like social workers and less like accountants" (p. 2943). Agencies face at least three additional management challenges in implementing JOBS that merit the attention of social work managers: (1) intraorganizational and interorganizational linkages, (2) intensity and continuity of services, and (3) management information systems. JOBS requires increased communication and coordination of services within welfare agencies because income maintenance, education and training services, and child care services must be linked for the participant to effectively engage in JOBS. Welfare agencies and their personnel will be required to develop new mechanisms for organizational operations; they can no longer afford to separate these units. JOBS also requires coordination and cooperation with numerous other agencies, including child care providers, Job Training Partnership Act agencies, educational programs, and providers of training. The scope of this state and local coordination will challenge the most able administrator. What social work brings to this challenge is an awareness that it is the client who is to be served, not the bureaucracy. A key issue in previous welfare employment programs has been their capacity to process program participants in a timely manner. Often, participants' progress was delayed as they attempted to move from one program component to another. Some of the barriers to service continuity are participant barriers(for example, a change in family circumstances). Others are organizational barriers. Managers must develop methods to process clients from one component to another, as well as to logically sequence program components so they remain accessible to participants. Many states must develop new information systems to meet the federal reporting requirements. In designing these systems, consideration must be given to goingbeyond mere compliance with federal requirements. A well-designed system should be able to provide state policymakers with information about the effects of the programs, patterns of use, availability of services, and so forth. In addition, the system should be useful to the frontline workers who provide services to clients. A good system must incorporate databases on educational programs, training programs, and child care options, as well as other information important in designing individualized programs for each mother and her children.
Staff Development and Training
The changes called for by JOBS require extensive staff development and training extending beyond knowledge about the new rules and regulations. Staffmust assume new roles and functionsthataremoreclientfocused. Given this change in expectations for frontline workers, social workers may be uniquely qualified to provide staff training in areas related to practice and human behavior. For example, a critical role will be played by the income maintenance workers who determine eligibility of AFDC benefits and provide access services (Hagen, 1987). As JOBS is implemented, it is anticipated that income maintenance workers will be called on to provide access services and, possibly, to conduct initial assessments. To perform these functions, income maintenance workers must have knowledge about human development and human functioning, an understanding of cultural and ethnic variables, and information about the effects of poverty and associated socioeconomic conditions on individual and family functioning. They also need skills to engage the client in appropriate referral activities, knowledge of agency and community resources, and case advocacy skills.
Policy Analysis and Advocacy
Social work's policy analysis and advocacy roles are needed as JOBS is implemented.The policy analysis must continue to point out the societal factors that restrict the ability of individuals to be economically self-sufficient. Social work must continue to highlight such factors as the geographic restrictions of job availability, the extent to which full-time work fails to support a family, pay differentials by gender and ethnicity, and the lack of societal supports for dependent care. The vision presented must be the alleviation of poverty, not the reduction of welfare dependency. Policy analysis must also focus on AFDC and the new JOBS programs. The inadequacy of welfare benefits, the inequities caused by maintaining state discretion in determining standards of need and levels of benefits, and the potentially punitive components of the new legislation must be highlighted. Thoughtful and comprehensive policy analysis in keeping with the profession's values and commitment to disadvantaged people will frame the profession's advocacy agenda at the national and state levels. This advocacy agenda must include increasing AFDC benefits, expanding the earned income and child care tax credits, providing government-subsidized dependent care, guaranteeing access to health care, developing parental leave policies, and establishing pay equity. It also must include advocating for intensive education and training services that will enable AFDC mothers to obtain jobs that provide good salaries and benefits.
Research
Social work also has a role to play in the research on the JOBS programs. In evaluation studies conducted on the welfare-to-work programs, little attention has been given to their effects on program participants, their lives, and their families. The technology has been developed to measure the net benefits from welfare-to-work programs. Research That Includes client assessments of the program's strengths and limitations is critical if welfare-to-work programs are to be understood. Social work researchers must identify the factors in JOBS programs that enrich people's lives, as well as those that hinder and interfere with development and functioning. As the JOBS legislation undergoes future revision, social work researchers must be in the forefront with findings on how welfare to-work programs directly affect those who participate.
Conclusion
The implementation of JOBS provides renewed opportunities for the social work profession as well as for individual social work practitioners to become involved in public assistance policy and programs. As a profession, social workers have an obligation to become involved and to be a voice for disadvantaged and poor people in society. This obligation includes ensuring that each client receives quality services responsive to her and her family's needs and also informing the public and policymakers about the limitations of welfare-to-work programs. The danger ofJOBS is that AFDC mothers will be blamed should the program fail. Workmust begin now to prevent blaming the victim. Although the obligation is clear and the knowledge base matches the need, the probability of increased involvement in public welfare by social work is not immediately likely. The current reality of public bureaucracies coupled with a conservative climate and the profession's focus on restricted practice technologies does not lend itself to predictions of increased social work involvement. However, the profession does have a national association that continues to advocate for some social policies beneficial to AFDC mothers and their children. The association's National Center for Social Policy and Practice has begun research on the implementation ofJOBS and its effects onAFDC families. A few social work researchers and advocates are investing significant resources into evaluating and monitoring the implementation of JOBS in various states. And many social workers, regardless of their fields of practice, witness the effects of public welfare policies on the lives of their clients. By making public issues of these private troubles (Schwartz, 1969), social workers contribute to creating more progressive social welfare policies. These activities, although limited, may be sufficient to provide a foundation for increased social work involvement in public welfare in the future. Perhaps the 1990s will parallel the 1920s, a period frequently mischaracterized as devoid of social reform. Clarke Chambers (1963, cited in Trattner, 1984) called the 1920s the "seedtime of reform" in which "social workers kept alive and vital the crusade for social action, and thus formed a viable link between prewar progressiveness and the New Deal; they sparked many social action crusades that anticipated the reform programs of the following decade" (p. 252).